all right we are now closing in on 9,000
cases of the corona virus here in the US
that's because the state of New York
reportedly has reportedly nearly 600 new
cases this morning sending the number of
nationwide cases to over eighty nine
hundred last hour we reported the number
at ninety five hundred that number has
since been revised and illustration of
just have fluid fast-moving and chaotic
this situation is New York alone has
nearly three thousand cases a third of
the nationwide number and more than
double Washington State which has the
second highest number of confirmed cases
joining us now Governor Andrew Cuomo of
New York and governor if you could
update us more accurately if possible on
the number of tests available for New
York versus the demand out there for the
tests sure good morning good morning to
all of your money
New York's numbers high number one
because of our population our density
etc also we are testing at a very high
rate we did about eight thousand tests
just overnight and in this situation the
more you test more positives you're
going to find it is in no way reflective
of the spread of the virus I think the
spread of the virus is well in advance
of any of these numbers so really what's
happening is the more you test the more
positives you're going to find
especially the way you test because we
tracked down the positives right you
have one positive person and then you go
down the line so we did eight thousand
overnight which is one of the largest
numbers I think ever done in the country
and that's a good news but yeah so the
we haven't gotten this morning's tally
but you're going to see it jump
astronomically I have no doubt because
we did so many tests so governor we hear
from medical experts that we maybe two
three weeks behind as far as these
numbers they're lagging indicators these
these are people who got it
three weeks ago can you bring your best
estimates buy the best estimates the
medical experts that you've spoken with
if we're showing right now 89
hundred cases in the United States what
do you multiply that in your mind is it
is it possibly fivefold tenfold of that
number that we're seeing right now
because of the three-week lag it may be
even it may be even higher than we're
even talking about Joe we did some
projections we think here in New York
and remember you want to have different
trajectories in different states
depending on when it started at etc but
we're looking here at a peak in about
five or six weeks we're looking at about
110,000 hospitalizations about
twenty-five to thirty seven thousand
people needing ICU beds that vastly
overwhelms our healthcare capacity and
that's what this has all been all about
from day one trying to reduce the rate
of the spread to meet your capacity of
your healthcare system the best news is
I think the federal government has now
really gotten this and they're engaged
this is a war it's a different type of
war but it's a war requiring massive
government mobilization and only the
federal government can do that states
can't fight wars we did it once it was a
disaster so you need the federal
government you need that capacity and I
was HUD secretary as you know I'm
governor now I know that a state cannot
do this I know the potential of the
federal government and the president
stepping up saying he's in Army Corps of
Engineers Department of Defense that's
what we need to bring that kind of
capacity we have a real equipment
problem ventilators are going to wind up
being the great story when this is over
the way we needed missiles in world wars
we need ventilators and we'll lose
people without ventilators believe it or
not Governor Cuomo's willie Geist
appreciate you take some time with us
this morning I want to ask you about
something a lot of people at least in
this city are starting to believe is
inevitable
which is a full lockdown not just of New
York City but perhaps of the state of
New York at some point which is to say
everybody stays in their house unless
there's some kind of an emergency or
their apartment mayor de Blasio floated
that idea you surprised some people at
the NYPD when he floated that I can tell
you behind the scenes you came out
yesterday and tried to tamp that down
and said wait a minute we're not gonna
shut down the place just yet so what is
your threshold where you say this is bad
enough or I see something in the horizon
that's coming where everybody's just got
to stay inside until further notice yeah
Willy two points first I make decisions
based on the science based on the data
based on the numbers when the numbers go
up that spread is increasing then we
ratchet up the density controls right
because that's what we're really trying
to do reduce the density we did it
yesterday we did it the day before and
we'll do it again today but I think
there's a bigger point we're battling
the virus were also battling the fear
and the panic and the fear and the panic
I think can be worse than the virus I
cut my teeth on disasters down in
Florida Homestead Florida with Hurricane
Andrew when I was HUD assistant
secretary I've seen panicked I've seen
fear and I am Telling You that is more
frightening than the virus and
communication is very important we've
had mixed messages from the federal
government I'm glad the president is now
fully engaged but this chaos is feeding
a panic and when you get to a dense
place like New York City you panic
people you're going to have a real
problem that you can't manage and I'm
telling you the fear is spreading faster
than the virus is spreading and the fear
is harder for us to deal with so do I
talk about density control yes closing
down businesses yes I'm not talking
about imprisonment of people in their
homes I'm not talking about quarantine
and roadblocks where you're locked into
a geographic area
that will explode panic in New York City
so we're looking as you're speaking
governor at a live picture of Times
Square it's just after 8 o'clock in the
morning it's rush hour just a handful of
cab snow people out on a rainy day
passing through there
I think most people are quarantine
themselves effectively anyway staying
inside so I understand and I take your
point about fear and panic but at what
point do the health risks exceed your
concerns about fear and panic in other
words the idea that if anybody's out and
about this thing only gets worse from a
medical point of view yeah well let's go
back to the facts Willie we are
ratcheting up the density control let's
call it yesterday I said no more than
50% of the employees of any business can
go to work 50 percent must work at home
and I've asked all businesses to keep
their workers at home and that's why you
see the low level but it's not that
people can't go out of their homes right
it you can't be in a dense environment
social distancing works and makes sense
and we have to do it but it's not that
you have to be locked down you know
these some of these terms are so
confusing shelter-in-place literally
meant in an active-shooter situation or
a nuclear disaster find the interior
room with no windows and stay there
until you get the all-clear message you
know you're scaring the heck out of me
right
so yes density reduction yes stay inside
yes social distancing but communicate in
a way that is comforting to people who
are already confused and panicked
speaking of comforting people you have
twice committed the president the
administration in this interview talking
about how they seem to be engaged how
they seem to be understanding the
gravity of this situation talk about
that a little bit because I know that
you and the president have gone back and
forth at the beginning of this crisis
tweeted about you
and yet at least this morning you seemed
to think that the president and his
administration are starting to get their
arms around this crisis that would be
comforting I think for a lot of
Americans explain why Joe to say we go
back and forth is a very kind sort of
Floridian way to to explain our
exchanges yeah I don't think you've had
a governor who's been more aggressively
opposed to the president's policies and
more vocal about it than I have and I'm
and I'm proud of it and I believe New
York is the progressive capital of the
nation and I'll always make that fight
and when the president was not
responding
early on I made that point also I've had
a number of conversations with the
president I spoke with him again last
evening you hear what he says publicly
forget the politics for a second job we
need the federal government to step up
we want to encourage that we want to
invite that I said to the president we
need you we need the federal government
I don't have the resources to do this I
can't build more hospital beds in 45
days only the federal government can do
that only the Army Corps of Engineers
can do that I can't order manufacturers
to build gloves and PPE and ventilators
only the federal government can do that
so we want them mobilised because we
can't fight this war without the federal
government and I said to the president
you step up you help my state you help
my people you help this country and I
will put my hand out in in partnership
100% because politics be darned right
now right this is a war and depending on
how we handle it will be how many people
die and that's it in terms of our
readiness Governor Cuomo I know there's
two military ships coming to the New
York area but it's going to be weeks and
I believe
that's four people being it's one ship
to the New York area being true or don't
have coronavirus being transported to
the ship but this is weeks away if that
how are New York State hospitals right
now are they ready
could you use separate military or
separate hospitals to deal with
coronavirus cases and if so why is that
not happening yeah a good question mica
let's say we need 30,000 more ICU beds
in New York intensive care beds because
the intensive care beds have the
ventilators the people who are coming
into the hospitals need the ventilators
it's a respiratory illness I am trying
to get more capacity within the existing
hospitals i regulate them I can do that
we need to build more hospital beds
that's the Army Corps of Engineers they
were here last night I met with them
we're planning that and we need the
equipment a bed without a ventilator
does nothing for me and that's where the
federal government has to use its full
muscle that's the federal defense
procurement Act that is the way we made
missiles in World War two you have to
make ventilators now General Electric
makes them Phillips makes them and
that's what the federal government
really has to help find the beds but
even more find the equipment
Governor Cuomo jauntily our two
questions for you we know about the
drive-in testing site in New Rochelle
obviously in New York City a lot of
residents don't have cars are there
going to be an equivalent here perhaps a
walk-in sites that can be open and
secondly Mara de Blasio has called for
the military itself beyond the National
Guard which was here in Manhattan
yesterday unloading supplies the
military itself to be here in the city
streets to help with the response do you
want that as well well I'm using the
National Guard all across the state
right and they've been very helpful
they're always helpful in disasters by
the way calling her at the National
Guard shouldn't send up a panic flare I
use them for snow storms floods
everything they're the they are the
state work force
military help yes Army Corps of
Engineers help us build hospital beds as
quickly as possible
DoD assets equipment logistics yes
military personnel if you're implying on
the streets no Kareem jean-pierre has a
question Kareem hey governor yesterday
you signed a bill that guarantees New
Yorkers get paid sick leave can you talk
more about that look this this this
crisis works on so many levels and one
of them is just economics long term
which is going to be a whole situation
in and of itself but short term and paid
sick leave which I supported before this
anyway is now so abundantly obvious that
we have to pass it we should pass it
nationwide we passed it in this state
and I've quarantined about 10,000 people
paying the people who we have
quarantined both mandatory and voluntary
we think is essential just to stabilize
the economy now and paid sick leave and
quarantine pay go a long way
I hope the federal government passes the
current bill which would actually give
Americans some money in their pocket to
buy food just to stabilize the
short-term situation all right governor
andrew cuomo thank you very very much
for being on the show this morning we
appreciate it thanks for checking out
MSNBC on YouTube and make sure you
subscribe to stay up-to-date on the
day's biggest stories and you can click
on any of the videos around us to watch
more 4 Morning Joe and MSNBC thanks so
much for watching